Adding Design Principles (#596)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension: site-src/concepts/design-principles.md

# Design Principles

## Focus on the core interfaces

There are two interfaces of note here:

### 1. Gateway -> Endpoint Picker
At a high level, this defines how a Gateway provides information to an Endpoint Picker, and how the Endpoint Picker selects endpoint(s) that the Gateway should route to.

### 2. Endpoint Picker -> Model Server Framework
This defines what an Endpoint Picker should expect from a compatible Model Server Framework with a focus on health checks and metrics.

> Although we can extend these interfaces in the future, it’s critical to get these right early in the project and stabilize them as soon as possible. We want to be able to give controller and extension developers a stable target to build against.

Author: This is a great intro, thanks! I added this while also reworking the first principle to be more of a "principle" since I do think it's important. Hope this makes sense.

## The default out of the box experience should be compelling

> We want to ensure that our defaults, including our reference Endpoint Picker, are sufficiently tuned that most Inference Gateway users will have a great experience without the need for significant customization.

Author: Updated, thanks!

> We want to ensure that our defaults, including our reference Endpoint Picker, are sufficiently tuned that most Inference Gateway users will have a great experience without the need for significant customization.

Reviewer: > Extensions are critical for innovation and flexibility

Ok cool, I think you can say this at the top. It's kinda a "guiding principle".

> Our default path needs to be great, so we need to continue to invest in our reference extension

Maybe:

```suggestion
## Our presets are finely tuned

We provide APIs and reference implementations for the most common inference requirements. Our defaults for those APIs and implementations—shaped by extensive experience with leading model serving platforms and APIs—are designed to provide the majority of AI Gateway users with a great default experience without the need for extensive configuration or customization. If you take all of our default extensions and attach them to a compatible `Gateway`, it just "works out of the box".
```

Might need some more workshopping, but LMKWYT? :thinking:

> We want to ensure that our defaults, including our reference Endpoint Picker, are sufficiently tuned that most Inference Gateway users will have a great experience without the need for significant customization.

Author: Updated, thanks!

## Encourage innovation via extensibility

> This project is largely based on the idea that extensibility will enable innovation. With that in mind, we should make it as easy as possible for AI researchers to experiment with custom scheduling and routing logic. They should not need to know how to build a Kubernetes controller, or replicate a full networking stack. Instead, all the information needed to make a routing decision should be provided in an accessible format, with clear guidelines and examples of how to customize routing logic.

Author: I think we're seeing this succeed with llm-d and the more recent https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/pull/845.

## Objectives over instructions

> The pace of innovation in this ecosystem has been rapid. Focusing too heavily on the specifics of current techniques could result in the API becoming outdated quickly. Instead of making the API too descriptive about _how _an objective should be achieved, this API should focus on the objectives that a Gateway and/or Endpoint Picker should strive to attain. Overly specific instructions or configuration can start as implementation specific APIs and grow into standards as the concepts become more stable and widespread.

Reviewer: This section, more than any other section, as a "Design Principle" is not resonating with me just yet. To me this reads like it's trying to talk about scope control. Could you please help me to better understand the intent here, by providing a somewhat detailed example of a situation that could occur which would run counter to this principle? I think that would help me to better understand what it's trying to convey :thinking:

Reviewer 2: One example is configuration options for the scheduling algorithm itself, some of those configuration parameters may only be relevant to the current iteration of algorithm implementation.

Reviewer 3: >One example is configuration options for the scheduling algorithm itself...

It sounds like we should have a scheduler API with EPP consuming it.

Author: >It sounds like we should have a scheduler API with EPP consuming it.

Agreed. I think that's largely what @ahg-g's [proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1x6aI9pbTF5oOsaEQYc9n4pBBY3_AuEY2X51VKxmBSnU/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.towq7jyczzgo) is a bout.

> ## Extend instead of reinvent
> 
> Although it’s tempting to develop an entirely new form of AI-focused Gateways, the reality is that there are a lot of baseline routing capabilities needed for any Gateway that have already been well defined by Kubernetes. Instead of trying to reinvent the full stack, this project should allow both networking and AI experts to focus on their respective strengths. Existing Gateways can be utilized for all the existing routing capabilities they provide, while this extensible model can enable AI experts to focus exclusively on how an endpoint is selected.

Reviewer: Is this simply describing that this project wants to remain as "APIs and reference implementations for extensions _ONLY_"? If so, I think that's legit, I can understand not wanting people to come to this project and start trying to propose an `AIGateway` resource.

Here's a paraphrase given how I interpreted this, for your considerations:

```suggestion
## Composable components and reducing reinvention

While it may be tempting to develop an entirely new AI-focused Gateway, many essential routing capabilities are already well established by Kubernetes. Our focus is on creating a layer of composable components that can be assembled together with other Kubernetes components. This approach empowers engineers to use our solution as a building block—combining established technologies like Gateway API with our extensible model to build higher level solutions.
```

LMKWYT?

Author: Updated, thanks!

## Additions to the API should be carefully prioritized

> Every addition to the API should take the principles described above into account. Given that the goal of the API is to encourage a highly extensible ecosystem, each additional feature in the API is raising the barrier for entry to any new controller or extension. Our top priority should be to focus on concepts that we expect to be broadly implementable and useful. The extensible nature of this API will allow each individual implementation to experiment with new features via custom flags or APIs before they become part of the core API surface.

Reviewer: I feel like this combined with some of the above creates a theme of sensitivity around scope control. Perhaps the two sections can come together into one principle that tries to tackle scope control?

# Design Principles

These principles guide our efforts to build flexible [Gateway API] extensions
that empower the development of high-performance [AI Inference] routing
technologies—balancing rapid delivery with long-term growth.

!!! note "Inference Gateways"

    For simplicity, we'll refer to Gateway API Gateways which are
    composed together with AI Inference extensions as "Inference Gateways"
    throughout this document.

[Gateway API]:https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api
[AI Inference]:https://www.arm.com/glossary/ai-inference

> 

Reviewer 3: nit: Remove extra line

## Prioritize stability of the core interfaces

The most critical part of this project is the interfaces between components. To encourage both controller and extension developers to integrate with this project, we need to prioritize the stability of these interfaces.
Although we can extend these interfaces in the future, it’s critical the core is stable as soon as possible.

When describing "core interfaces", we are referring to both of the following:

### 1. Gateway -> Endpoint Picker

> At a high level, this defines how a Gateway provides information to an Endpoint Picker, and how the Endpoint Picker selects endpoint(s) that the Gateway should route to.

Reviewer 3: nit: Add a space after the heading.

> At a high level, this defines how a Gateway provides information to an Endpoint Picker, and how the Endpoint Picker selects endpoint(s) that the Gateway should route to.

Reviewer 3: nit: Add a space after the heading.

### 2. Endpoint Picker -> Model Server Framework

> This defines what an Endpoint Picker should expect from a compatible Model Server Framework with a focus on health checks and metrics.

Reviewer 3: nit: Add a space after the heading.

## Encourage innovation via extensibility

This project is largely based on the idea that extensibility will enable innovation. With that in mind, we should make it as easy as possible for AI researchers to experiment with custom scheduling and routing logic. They should not need to know how to build a Kubernetes controller, or replicate a full networking stack. Instead, all the information needed to make a routing decision should be provided in an accessible format, with clear guidelines and examples of how to customize routing logic.

## Objectives over instructions

The pace of innovation in this ecosystem has been rapid. Focusing too heavily on the specifics of current techniques could result in the API becoming outdated quickly. Instead of making the API too descriptive about _how_ an objective should be achieved, this API should focus on the objectives that a Gateway and/or Endpoint Picker should strive to attain. Overly specific instructions or configuration can start as implementation specific APIs and grow into standards as the concepts become more stable and widespread.

## Composable components and reducing reinvention

> While it may be tempting to develop an entirely new AI-focused Gateway, many essential routing capabilities are already well established by Kubernetes. Our focus is on creating a layer of composable components that can be assembled together with other Kubernetes components. This approach empowers engineers to use our solution as a building block—combining established technologies like Gateway API with our extensible model to build higher level solutions. Should you encounter a limitation, consider how existing tooling may be extended or improved first.

Reviewer 3: nit: Add a space after the heading.

# Design Principles

These principles guide our efforts to build flexible [Gateway API] extensions
that empower the development of high-performance [AI Inference] routing
technologies—balancing rapid delivery with long-term growth.

!!! note "Inference Gateways"

    For simplicity, we'll refer to Gateway API Gateways which are
    composed together with AI Inference extensions as "Inference Gateways"
    throughout this document.

[Gateway]:https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api
[AI Inference]:https://www.arm.com/glossary/ai-inference

## Prioritize stability of the core interfaces

> The most critical part of this project is the interfaces between components. To encourage both controller and extension developers to integrate with this project, we need to prioritize the stability of these interfaces.

Author: 🤔 I think `is` is correct here because it's in reference to the singular `part`. I asked Gemini to be sure and it explained the following:

The subject of the sentence is "the most critical part". The verb should agree with the singular noun "part". The phrase "of this project" and "the interfaces between components" are prepositional phrases that modify the subject but do not change its singularity..

Although we can extend these interfaces in the future, it’s critical the core is stable as soon as possible.

When describing "core interfaces", we are referring to both of the following:

### 1. Gateway -> Endpoint Picker
At a high level, this defines how a Gateway provides information to an Endpoint Picker, and how the Endpoint Picker selects endpoint(s) that the Gateway should route to.

### 2. Endpoint Picker -> Model Server Framework
This defines what an Endpoint Picker should expect from a compatible Model Server Framework with a focus on health checks and metrics.

> ## Our presets are finely tuned

Reviewer 4: I think we can more clearly define this. 

We want extensibility, and customization. But I think it's very important that we have a turnkey solution that works for the average person. 

To word another way, I think good defaults/presets can fall under a larger umbrella of: We want a strong OOB experience for those who don't want to deeply customize. And our later points are about making this easily extensible and adaptable for those who _do_ want to customize. Maybe that's implicit as a part of K8s.

> Our defaults—shaped by extensive experience with leading model serving platforms and APIs—are designed to provide the majority of AI Gateway users with a great default experience without the need for extensive configuration or customization.

Author: Updated, thanks!

> 

Author: Updated, thanks!

## Encourage innovation via extensibility

This project is largely based on the idea that extensibility will enable innovation. With that in mind, we should make it as easy as possible for AI researchers to experiment with custom scheduling and routing logic. They should not need to know how to build a Kubernetes controller, or replicate a full networking stack. Instead, all the information needed to make a routing decision should be provided in an accessible format, with clear guidelines and examples of how to customize routing logic.

## Objectives over instructions

> The pace of innovation in this ecosystem has been rapid. Focusing too heavily on the specifics of current techniques could result in the API becoming outdated quickly. Instead of making the API too descriptive about _how _an objective should be achieved, this API should focus on the objectives that a Gateway and/or Endpoint Picker should strive to attain. Overly specific instructions or configuration can start as implementation specific APIs and grow into standards as the concepts become more stable and widespread.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The pace of innovation in this ecosystem has been rapid. Focusing too heavily on the specifics of current techniques could result in the API becoming outdated quickly. Instead of making the API too descriptive about _how_ an objective should be achieved, this API should focus on the objectives that a Gateway and/or Endpoint Picker should strive to attain. Overly specific instructions or configuration can start as implementation specific APIs and grow into standards as the concepts become more stable and widespread.
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

## Composable components and reducing reinvention

> While it may be tempting to develop an entirely new AI-focused Gateway, many essential routing capabilities are already well established by Kubernetes. Our focus is on creating a layer of composable components that can be assembled together with other Kubernetes components. This approach empowers engineers to use our solution as a building block—combining established technologies like Gateway API with our extensible model to build higher level solutions.

Reviewer 4: Consider rewording, perhaps this is personal bias, but the first sentence reads as if to ward off the reader from attempting to implement something new. 

The later sentences focus on the _value_ of using what has already been built, which I think is what we are going for. Perhaps move the concept of the first sentence to the end as something like:

> Should you encounter a limitation, consider how existing tooling may be extended or improved first. Suggestions always welcomed (and encouraged) at our sync link-goes-here.
